# Airline-Delay-Prediction

### Introduction

   One of the biggest downsides of traveling is the delays and cancellation of flights which results in the deteriorating customer satisfaction. These delays are associated with many factors including the weather conditions, connecting flights or technical issues, and these prove costly, both quantitative and qualitative. Also, the growing aviation industry has resulted in the air-traffic congestion which increases the chances of the flights getting delayed. Along with the economic impacts, the flight delays are also associated with the harmful effects on the environment. With all these things going around, it is becoming very challenging to effectively manage the air-traffic and to meet the traveler’s expectations.

### Description

   Unpredicted flight delays can ruin the extraordinary vacation memories. The airline delay makes the passengers lose their trust from the famous and internationally recognized airlines. An advanced and automated prediction system with a great accuracy must be created that can predict the likely airline delay. This system can save passengers from the hassle and can also help the airlines to run their business smoothly. Apart from the delays resulting due to the weather, security and the limited airspace capacity, one-third of the airline delays were caused by a late-arriving aircraft and thus making it depart late for its next schedule, which is known as delay propagation. Generally, the airlines run their aircraft on a scheduled itinerary daily which requires the transit from a network of airports, a late-arriving aircraft early in the day can significantly impact the upcoming flights. For example, if an aircraft is delayed by one hour in a departure from the first airport, it will almost certainly be late in arriving at its next airport; the late arrival may also result in a late subsequent departure of that aircraft, which will lead to a sequence of late-arriving aircraft delays.

   With this in mind, we decided to pursue the issue of predicting fight delays using machine learning. More precisely, our aim was to predict fight delays for flights departing from SFO using information like weather conditions, flight carrier, day of the month, destination airport. We trained our model on the collected datasets. Such a model is useful because:
  
     The analysis of air delays becomes vital since a better knowledge of their existence, and corresponding triggers, can improve the operational performance of airlines and, consequently airports, by anticipating delay and preparing schedules accordingly.
     Predicting departure delay is vital for customer satisfaction, reduced congestion at airports, preventing the ripple effect of one delay leading to another and also save costs.
